# Maximum Diversification
The goal of this strategy is to generate portfolios with the highest possible diversification index. This seems to be the best one due to the sustainable constraints that have been added. Therefore, the classic risk-return relationship becomes risk-return-impact since more and more investors are willing to rely on companies they can trust and have well-defined ethics. This strategy with a risk management approach based on ESG factors aims at improving long-term returns that positively impact investors.<br>
The index chosen as a benchmark is the Dow Jones (full name: Dow Jones Industrial Average), which includes 30 blue-chips companies and it is based on a price-weighted measurement (sum of the prices of all the underlying stocks is divided by a divisor, the Dow Divisor). The present divisor, after a lot of adjustments, is less than one: 0.1519 (this means that the DJIA is larger than the sum of the prices of the components).<br>

Computing the inverse of the Herfindahl index, the benchmark effectively invests in 24 stocks out of 30, being the best value among all the other benchmark’s versions, except for equally-weighted. A low sector exposure emerges and the sector in which we invested more is IT with a merely 19.69%.<br><br>

Moreover, the Max Diversification approach has the lowest standard deviation (12.78%) value among all the other versions of the Dow Jones. Despite it has not the highest value of return, our index seems to be the best compromise for pension funds thanks to a Max Diversification of 174.27% with minimal correlated stocks and lower risks than the other versions of the benchmark. Backtesting examines the profitability of a strategy by testing its performance based on historical data. We based our assumptions on the year September 2020 to 2021 because we expect the following years to follow the same trend, reaching a final performance of 20.91%. Measuring the Sharpe ratio, we have noticed that Max Diversification (1.53) has overcame the benchmark’s cap-weighted version by 0.7 and it is in line with the price-weighted (1.56). It is also worth mentioning the tracking error, comparing our proposal to the benchmark, because we can easily say that we do not deviate too much from them and it also gives an idea of the quality of replication (that is relevant because if there is low replication quality you are taking more risk).<br>
Linked to the tracking error, we measured the information ratio so as to give more insights about the excess of return of our strategy compared to the benchmark and, except for the cap-weighted, the others are all below 0 because of negative active returns.<br><br>


## Maximum Diversification and ESG Constraint
The diversification strategy chosen for this portfolio has the foundation of Maximum Diversification, introduced by Choueifaty and Coignard, with an additional constraint of the ESG index. The maximum diversification portfolio, as its name has stated, aims to diversify a set of assets to its maximum level given the diversification index. Unlike the cap-weighted or equally-weighted benchmark portfolios, Maximum Diversification is able to generate a high level of return at a lower volatility level. Especially for the case of pension funds management or simply for risk-averse investors, the importance of the reduction on volatility rises even more.<br>
Instead of simply using the maximum diversification method, an ESG constraint is also introduced in our portfolio. The index that was used is called the ESG risk rating. This particular ESG rating index is developed by Sustainalytics, and it focuses on the size of the company's unmanaged ESG risks from three perspectives: corporate governance, MEIs, and idiosyncratic issues.<br>
In the financial market, the attention brought onto the sustainability level of publicly listed companies continues to grow. The industry leaders like the ones that DJ30 has picked out are now under the spotlight for their decisions on their stance on sustainability. There exists a strong belief that the decision and performance of ESG of a company would influence the price of its stock in the future, which would then influence the return of our portfolio. Thus, it was clear that an ESG constraint is necessary to put in to further reduce the risk of sudden fluctuations in stock prices due to policy or regulation changes in the sustainability sector.<br><br>

## Comparison Between MD and the Benchmark
By using Maximum Diversification with ESG constraint, the portfolio is able to generate a 20.91% return, which is higher than the cap-weighted strategy, but slightly lower than equally-weighted and price-weighted versions of the benchmark. However, taking volatility into consideration, our portfolio has the lowest level of annualized volatility among the four in total, a merely 12.78% volatility.
Though our return looks less promising compared to the equally-weighted and price-weighted benchmark portfolio, there is no reason to believe that the return of the benchmark would continue to stay at the same level even with the changes of economic conditions. Indeed, with the UN Sustainable Development Goals and other regulations about sustainable finance, the return would be higher for companies which comply with those standards and are committed to make the planet “greener”, making an impact.<br>
To show that our strategy maximized diversification even with the ESG constraint added, the inverse of Herfindahl index is calculated for each portfolio. Apart from the equally-weighted portfolio, Maximum Diversification has the highest number of effectively invested stocks, which is 24.18. Further calculations of C1, C2, and C3 also show that our strategy has the lowest level of concentration up to the C3 level.<br><br>

# Impact of macro-economic changes on our investment strategy
Monte Carlo scenario analysis is used to simulate different outcomes in a process that cannot be easily predicted due to presence of random variables. This model assists us in understanding the uncertainty and risk associated with the predicting and forecasting. In the scenario analysis, the model considers the following variables: return (μ), volatility (σ) and the number of scenarios. Furthermore, we have identified 3 different scenarios:
1. _Optimistic Scenario_: when the return is at its maximum and the volatility is at its lowest. The return is at 22.7%, maximum is when the inflation is presumed to be at 5.6% and the green bond rate of 1.5% is added. The green rate is added as it is thought that the investors would keep ESG as one of the primary focuses. The volatility is assumed to be minimum for this case at 11.5%. As the volatility is at its minimum the spread of the potential outcomes is narrow. As the number of scenarios are increased, most outcomes are above 1 (more than 95% close above 1 unit mark). As the US bounces back from the pandemic, the optimistic scenario looks achievable through our strategy, and the risk reward ratio is optimal. If the US would look towards Quantitative Easing, the stock market would reflect positively, and our strategy could benefit from this as the benefits of the QE could be seen across industry;
2. _Pessimistic Scenario_: when the return is at its minimum and the volatility is at its maximum. The return is 17.4%, minimum when the inflation is presumed to be at 3.3% and the green bond rate of 1.5% is subtracted. The green rate is subtracted as it is thought that the investors would not be phased by the ESG movement, and it will have a negative impact. The volatility is assumed to be maximum for this case at 15.4%. The highest volatility is when the difference between the lowest historical and real return is added from the historical volatility. As the volatility is at its maximum the spread of the potential outcomes is wide. As the number of scenarios are increased the outcomes where the wealth has gone below 1 increase. About 30% of the outcomes closes below the 1-unit mark. This scenario looks unlikely to happen as US companies are going to the ESG way. Also, as the US is going back to pre-pandemic times, jobs are being adding back and companies are producing optimal returns. In the case of the pessimistic scenario, our strategy would ensure that our investments would be safe thanks to our diversification;
3. _Neutral Scenario_ is based on the historical data and the backtesting we have performed reflects a positive future trend for investors. The return of the portfolio is taken, which is 20.9%, and the daily volatility is at 0.81%. The historical inflation is taken as to be 5.3%.
<br><br>

# Computations and Assumptions
## Macroeconomics-oriented Monte Carlo Simulation
In order to ensure that the return of the portfolio reflects the change of macroeconomics conditions, here is the simplified formula we assumed:
- __Nominated Return of Portfolio = Real Return of Portfolio + Rate of Inflation + or - ESG influence__
- __Nominated Volatility = Historical Volatility + or – (the standard deviation between historical case
return and new case return)__
1. For the _Neutral Scenario_, all elements above will be equal to the historical data. The return of the portfolio is 20.9%, the volatility is 12.8%, the rate of Inflation is 5.3%, and the influence of ESG remains unchanged
    - Real return of portfolio = 20.9% - 5.3% = 15.6%
3. For the _Optimistic Scenario_, the rate of inflation is assumed to be the highest inflation of the last 20 years in US, 5.6% (reached in 2008) since we assume that the Quantitative Easing will last for at least another year. The ESG influence raises as the green bond rate = 1.5%
    - Optimistic Return of Portfolio = 15.6% + 5.6% + 1.5% = 22.7%
    - Optimistic Volatility = 12.8% - (1.3%) = 11.5%
4. For the _Pessimistic Scenario_, the rate of inflation is assumed to be the lowest inflation of last 20 years in US, 3.3%. The ESG influence decreases as the Green Bond rate = 1.5%
    - Pessimistic Return of Portfolio = 15.6% + 3.3% - 1.5% = 17.4%
    - Pessimistic Volatility = 12.8% + (2.5%) = 15.3%
<br><br>

## ESG assumptions
To offer a proposal more sensible to sustainability standards, our Max Diversification strategy offers the integration of an ESG constraint. This is set up to comply with different factors, which, in case of non fulfilment, set the weight of the selected company to zero, thus excluding the company from the portfolio. This, indeed, creates more flexibility to our portfolio, as it grants the possibility to assign the weights of the companies of the Dow Jones Index based on the Sustainalytics ESG Risk Rating. The factors we considered to be significant in our strategy are the ESG Score Risk Rating, the exposure to ESG risks and company’s management power (in reference to the company’s programs and policies for a positive ESG impact).<br>
The computations of these constraints have been placed in the formula in the wisi Excel cells and are also visible in the conditional formatting of the ESG Risk Rating, thus allowing the Excel solver to provide the weights in accordance with just the other two constraints of sum of the weights adding to 100% and weights equal or greater than zero, therefore taking out the possibility of shorting the stocks.<br>
Starting with an IF statement, this formula includes four logical statements which, if at least one is respected, allows the resulting values to be the wisi. Contrary to this case is the one in which the logical statements are not respected. In this particular case, the resulting values deliver a zero, thereby removing the linked stocks when served to compute the Max Diversification portfolio weights with the Excel solver.<br>
The logical statements to be fulfilled in order to result a non-zero value (if at least one of the conditions is satisfied) are the following:
- Is the score lower than the average of 22.13?
- Or is Rank in the industry lower than 10%?
- Or is the Risk Exposure “Medium” or “Low” and the Management “Strong”?
- Or is the ESG Risk “Medium”?
<br>

This computation provides us a final answer which excludes four stocks of the Dow Jones Index from our Max Diversification Portfolio: 3M, Boeing, Caterpillar and Chevron. Our Max Diversification is therefore computed as the division between the sum of the weighted volatilities and the squared root of the volatilities weighted with the covariance matrix.<br>
$Max\ Diversification=\frac{\Sigma\omega_i\sigma_i}{\sqrt{\Sigma\omega_i\omega_j\sigma_i}}=\frac{1.4239%}{0.8170%}=174.27%$
<br>
Our Max Diversification approach delivers an important result deemed important for the risk-return attributes we chose to propose. In fact, as the name suggests, the weight assigned to each company in the index has been computed to force out the maximum possible diversification among those companies; this, as explained above, is constrained by the ESG Risk Rating. The sector concentration (computed with a SUMIF formula) shows a 49.78% condensation of the three biggest sectors, thus leaving ample margins of investment in the remaining 12 sectors.
<br><br>

## Performance, risks, and ratios
Our analysis provides a comparison of the returns of the period considered, from September 1st, 2020, to August 31st, 2021, computed as 1 dollar invested at the beginning of the period and compounded for each day’s return until the last day taken into account. Regarding the equally-weighted and the price-weighted strategies, both of them display the same tracking error of 0.21% and a negative active return. This means that Max Diversification offers a lower actual return (calculated as the difference between the overall return of the Max Diversification and the other strategy considered), nonetheless compensated by its lower annualized volatility.<br>
The information ratios are the active returns divided by their annualized tracking errors and provide a measure of the difference of the risk-adjusted returns for each strategy with respect to the Max Diversification strategy, considering the volatility of the active return. Furthermore, to give a measure of the risk-return profile of the strategies examined, we provided the Sharpe ratio. Determined as the excess return (the difference between the final value of the return of the period for each strategy and the risk-free rate) divided by the annualized volatility, this ratio allows for a comparison among the four portfolio strategies examined and indicates positive results apart from the Cap-weighted strategy, which indeed offer a Sharpe ratio lower than one.<br>
By starting with 1 dollar invested, the Cap-weighted strategy, produces a final value of 1.18 dollars with an active return of 3.15%, meaning that our strategy provides greater return. Moreover, this result is achieved with a greater risk-taking approach as the Sharpe ratio of 0.83 suggests, and the final value is the lowest of the studied strategies. Our Max Diversification strategy gives for 1 dollar invested at the beginning of the period, 1.21 dollars at the end of the period. Although it is lower than the equally-weighted and price- weighted strategies, it achieves so with a lower annualized volatility, a lower max drawdown and, most importantly, a selection in ESG standards for the companies to invest in.<br>
In conclusion, the Max Diversification ESG strategy proposed offers a greater balance of returns, volatility, effective number of stocks, sector concentration and max drawdown which is a best fit for the risk-return- impact relationship we want to provide for the pension fund and a distinguished application of the Modern Portfolio Theory.
